For past year I have been working (partially) as technical recruiter. This lead to some nice and some weird experiences, but mostly has been very interesting - sitting on the other side of the table. While the process of recruitment is not perfect, we are trying to make it  more open, inclusive and make sure people are going out with something: either an offer, or at least info about what was missing in them, where they are not lacking - but have some holes in skillset that is required for the position. Some skills, that people do not have at the moment, can be quickly learned. Others are more complex and people just didn't make it - that's how life goes sometimes.

Recently we've had discussion with fellow technical recruiters. We've touched few topics, all opinions were very interesting (mostly because quite different from mine). But one opinion struck me. Colleague said that he is very dissatisfied with job interviews that are nice and easy. What he said is that getting offer after nice interview, where everyone was not only respective but simply goes out of the way to make you feel included, and where there are no trick questions - just does not feel satisfying. That this is too easy. He expects that job has to be obtained through hard talk, complex questions, maybe trap question here and there. He has to sweat to get through it.

This feels totally weird to me. I understand feeling stressed out on job interview, it is hard to avoid. Someone is judging you, your skills, you are sitting in foreign space, unknown people. Hard to not sweat a little bit (use antiperspirant!). I however love it when people are open, happy to talk to me, are going out of their way to make questions clear and well defined. Do not try to trick me and prove me how unworthy I am of taking software engineering position at the company they are recruiting me to. Bleeding through interview is simply wrong to me. Why would I want to work with people that are trying to squeeze me out of my bucks (that's the whole point of job interviews with tricks etc. - they still want you if you fail to answer some of those, but this will go against you when going to money part of interview).

If you are interviewer - I urge you to be nicer, more inclusive of people. Lack of skills, holes in knowledge - we've all been there, none of us have been born with our current skill set. It is OK not to hire someone, but it is not OK to make them feel wrong about it.

We are not hiring coding monkeys. We are not hiring spec-ops soldiers that have to work under top stress conditions. We are not hiring robots.

We are hiring humans.